IBX-10684: Document translation management (#3249)
ezsystems/developer-documentation: docs/multisite/translations_management/translations_management_guide.md

Reviewer: "Benefits" section is missing.
There is a list of challenges at the top of the article, but the corresponding list of benefits is missing at the end. Adding one would help summarize the feature and highlight its value.

---
description: Translations management helps managers, developers and localization teams with multilingual content delivery.
edition: lts-update
month_change: true
---

# Translations management product guide

## What is Translations management

Content managers, translators, and proofreaders who work with multilingual content in [[= product_name =]] often face a common set of challenges:

- context is lost when the source text isn't visible alongside the translation
- translating long and complex content items is time-consuming
- quality assurance is slow and error-prone without a direct comparison view
- switching between tools or tabs to cross-reference languages disrupts focus and slows down publishing

> The Translations management package addresses these pain points through a side-by-side view, machine translation and the ability to invite reviewers to collaborate on the translation of a content items or products.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Translations management package addresses these pain points through a side-by-side view, machine translation and the ability to invite reviewers to collaborate on the translation of content items or products.
```

The package integrates with the [AI Actions framework](ai_actions.md) to support machine translation providers such as Google Translate and DeepL, and AI powered translation services like OpenAI, Anthropic, and Google Gemini.

Administrators can manage providers and configure default provider-to-language-pair mappings directly in [[= product_name =]]'s user interface, while editors can trigger machine translation from the content editing interface.

!!! note

    Translations management is a standalone set of features.
    Although some views are similar to those delivered by the [Automated translations](automated_translations.md) opt-in package, Translations management does not require the `ibexa/automated-translation` package to run.

>     These two packages use different namespaces, service tags, and provider interfaces.

Reviewer 2: Can we make some recommendations here? For example, translations management replaces/supersedes automated translation?

If you're using Automated Translation, consider moving to Translations Management?

Question for the future: will we support/release automated translation in 6.0?

## Availability

> Translations management is an [LTS Update](editions.md#lts-updates) available in all [[= product_name =]] editions.

Reviewer 2: Needs a minimal required version of the DXP.

See https://doc.ibexa.co/en/4.6/discounts/discounts_guide/#availability or https://doc.ibexa.co/en/4.6/administration/back_office/integrated_help/#install-package

Then, when an editor opens a content item and requests a new machine translation, the plugin resolves which provider to use.
If no language-pair rule matches, it falls back to the user's manual selection.
The plugin then extracts the translatable fields from the source language version of a content item and sends them to the configured provider's API.
The system writes the translated strings into a target-language draft of the content item, and opens it in a side-by-side view for the editor to review and refine.
The editor can save the result as a draft, share it with a reviewer or publish it.

![Translations management flow](translations_management_flow.png "Translations management flow")

## Capabilities

### Translation provider management

Administrators can manage translation providers and configure translation provider/language combination assignments ([language pairs](configure_translations_management.md#define-language-pairs)).
This allows administrators to define which provider handles which language combination.
Editors see the configured provider pre-selected when creating a new translation, but can override it if needed.

> ![Creating a language pair](translations_management_language_pairs.png "Creating a language pair")

Reviewer 2: This file is not here?

### Side-by-side translation view

Translations management introduces a [side-by-side translation view]([[= user_doc =]]/content_management/translate_content/#side-by-side-translation-view) that displays the read-only source language content next to an editable target language form.
In this view, editors can provide and review translations in context, without having to leave the content editing interface.

![Side-by-side translation view](managing_translations_sxs_view.png "Side-by-side translation view")

Editors can:

- access the side-by-side view when creating a new translation, reviewing an existing one, or editing a draft
- compare source and target content field by field while editing
- copy all content from the source column to the target column with a single action
- provide localized versions of media assets and their alternative text
- use the distraction-free mode for focused editing of individual fields, with AI actions available inline
- choose whether the source column appears on the left or right in user settings

!!! note "Excluded content types"

>     Content types that are editable in Page builder or Form builder are excluded from side-by-side editing.

Reviewer 2: Links to Page Builder and Form Builder? 
https://doc.ibexa.co/en/5.0/content_management/pages/pages/ and https://doc.ibexa.co/en/5.0/content_management/forms/forms/ , or the product guides

>     Products are editable in the side-by-side view, but product attributes are not translatable.

Reviewer 2: Good remark, might be worth to link to the product attributes note explaining this (https://doc.ibexa.co/en/5.0/product_catalog/products/#product-attributes:~:text=Attribute%20translations )

### Command-line translation

The Translations management package exposes a [console command](configure_translations_management.md#translate-content-items-with-cli) for translating content items from the command line.
You can use it for batch processing or automated workflows.

### Translation review

When a draft is created by going through the automatic translation process, it is marked as "For review".
Editors can [accept or reject the translation]([[= user_doc =]]/content_management/translate_content/#review-automatic-translation) directly in the side-by-side view.
Accepted drafts are marked as "Translated".

!!! note "No review for manual translations"

>     Draft translations that were created manually don't have a review status.

Reviewer 2: This seems like a difference - coming back to the mention of "triggering the translation from CLI has the same results as triggering from UI" in another article.

Author: The wording is wrong, I corrected it. What I meant is that human-made translations do not undergo review.

- switching between tools or tabs to cross-reference languages disrupts focus and slows down publishing

The Translations management package addresses these pain points through a side-by-side view, machine translation and the ability to invite reviewers to collaborate on the translation of content items or products.

The package integrates with the [AI Actions framework](ai_actions_guide.md) to support machine translation providers such as Google Translate and DeepL, and AI-powered translation services like OpenAI, Anthropic, and Google Gemini.

Administrators can manage providers and configure default provider-to-language-pair mappings directly in [[= product_name =]]'s back office, while editors can trigger machine translation from the content editing interface.

!!! note

    Translations management is a standalone set of features.
    Although some views are similar to those delivered by the [Automated translations](automated_translations.md) opt-in package, Translations management does not require the `ibexa/automated-translation` package to run.
    These two packages use different namespaces, service tags, and provider interfaces.

>     If you're currently using Automated translations, consider migrating to Translations management.

Reviewer 2: Can you please add the same note to the automated translation article?

## Availability

> Translations management is opt-in capability available as an [LTS Update](editions.md#lts-updates) available in all [[= product_name =]] editions, starting with the v5.0.10 version.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Translations management is an opt-in capability available as an [LTS Update](editions.md#lts-updates) for all [[= product_name =]] editions, starting with the v5.0.10 version.
```
To avoid the doubled `available`

Editors can:

- access the side-by-side view when creating a new translation, reviewing an existing one, or editing a draft
- compare source and target content field by field while editing
- copy all content from the source column to the target column with a single action
- provide localized versions of media assets and their alternative text
- use the distraction-free mode for focused editing of individual fields, with AI actions available inline
- choose whether the source column appears on the left or right in user settings

!!! note "Excluded content types"

    Content types that are editable in [Page builder](page_builder_guide.md) or [Form builder](form_builder_guide.md) are excluded from side-by-side editing.

    Products are editable in the side-by-side view, but [product attributes are not translatable](products.md#product-attributes).

### Command-line translation

The Translations management package exposes a [console command](translate_with_cli.md) for translating content items from the command line.
You can use it for batch processing or automated workflows.

### Translation review

> When a draft of a content item is created by going through the automatic translation process, it is marked as "For review".

Author: ```suggestion
When a draft translation of a content item or product is created by going through the automatic translation process in the back office, the system creates a review status record and marks the draft as "For review".
The console command bypasses this and drafts created with command-line translation are not assigned a review status.
```

---
description: Translations management helps managers, developers and localization teams with multilingual content delivery.
edition: lts-update
month_change: true
---

# Translations management product guide

## What is Translations management

> Content managers, translators, and proofreaders who work with multilingual content in [[= product_name =]] often face a common set of challenges:

Reviewer: Editors are mentioned in both docs, so maybe would fit more here.
```suggestion
Editors, translators, and proofreaders who work with multilingual content in [[= product_name =]] often face a common set of challenges:
```

In this view, editors can provide and review translations in context, without having to leave the content editing interface.

![Side-by-side translation view](managing_translations_sxs_view.png "Side-by-side translation view")

Editors can:

- access the side-by-side view when creating a new translation, reviewing an existing one, or editing a draft
- compare source and target content field by field while editing
- copy all content from the source column to the target column with a single action
- provide localized versions of media assets and their alternative text
- use the distraction-free mode for focused editing of individual fields, with AI actions available inline
- choose whether the source column appears on the left or right in user settings

!!! note "Excluded content types"

    Content types that are editable in [Page builder](page_builder_guide.md) or [Form builder](form_builder_guide.md) are excluded from side-by-side editing.

>     Products are editable in the side-by-side view, but [product attributes are not translatable](products.md#product-attributes).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Products are editable in the side-by-side view, but [product attributes aren't translatable](products.md#product-attributes).
```

### Command-line translation

The Translations management package exposes a [console command](translate_with_cli.md) for translating content items from the command line.
You can use it for batch processing or automated workflows.

### Translation review

When a draft translation of a content item or product is created by going through the automatic translation process in the back office, the system creates a review status record and marks the draft as "For review".

> The console command bypasses this and drafts created with command-line translation are not assigned a review status.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The console command bypasses this and drafts created with command-line translation aren't assigned a review status.
```

Editors can [accept or reject the translation]([[= user_doc =]]/content_management/translate_content/#review-automatic-translation) directly in the side-by-side view.
Accepted drafts are marked as "Translated".

When the editor rejects the translation, the status doesn't change, but the system records that the draft translation required corrections for statistical purposes.

> A draft translation in "Translated" state can't be rejected any more.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A draft translation in the "Translated" state can't be rejected anymore.
```
